ir arausice.

A thrch History 01 Ireland is, therefore, aurorlr 01 no ordi-
nary difficulty, requiring for its execution a collection 01
books hardly ever found in the same private or even public
library; manuscripts scattered wherever the Irish ecelesiastical
exiles found ahorne 5 and free acoess to the records 01 government
offices, 01 courts 01 justice, and of corporations, and to the copious
materials in the public librarios 01 England and Ireland.

ro remove sorne 01 those obstacles which obstruet the historian’s path,
and following up the resolution intimated in the prefaee to the Apologia
pro Hibernia, the editor has completed his preparations for publishing
aseries 01 rare worhs, illustrating the history 01 the Irish Catholics,
with several manuscripts already in his possession, and others which he
may be able to procuro. ¹These worhs shall be published at a price
which will make them as accessible as similar worhs iu other coun-
tries, instead 01 having them, as they are at present, objects 01 epicure
bibliomania, purchased for their weight in silver or gold. For the in-
formationes those who may not be aequainted with the prices which
those works on Irish Catholio History usually bring, it may be sufficient
testate, as an example, that the worlr which is now given to the
public generally selis for ⁴5th or elo. ’

O'Sullivan’s Catholic History comes first on the list: for, though
not first iu the order of time, it is second to none in historical value.
It was eompiled from the narratives of persons who had been engaged
inthose fierce wars which ended in the general plnnder ol the Irish
Church and people by Eliuabeth and dames 1. The author was one 01
those old Irish nobles who forfeited their propertiles and country in the
contest for the liberty 01 their saith. He tells his story with all the
warmth 01 a patriotand azealous Oatholic.¹ His testes, and the character
01 those from whom he derived his information, led him to pay snoh at-
tention to merely ecclesiastiea] details5 that he has been transcribet]
copiously, and sometimes without aohnowledgment, by ecclesiastical
historiens, who owe to him alone some 01 their most interesting pages.
On matters 01 general history, also, the value of liis labours is duly
attested by the very copious eutraots which the editors 01 some 01 the
’ most valnable modern pnhlieations have very judiciously insert-ecl from
him.

The author’s poern, snby'oined to this prelnee, gives abrict nc·

 

