Pnhrncu. V

count of his family. Before the English invasion, the O'Sullivans
had occupied rich tracts in the south-east ol Tipperary 3 but being,
like most of the old lrish families of Munster, expelled from their fer-
tile valleys hy the invaders, they retreated westward, and, preying on
wealrer tribes, toolr possession of the western parts of Oorlr and
Kerry. 'rue wild and mountainous traets around Bantry Bay, co-
entensire with the harony of Bear and Bautry, were possessed hy the
O’Sullevau Bear down to the close of Eliaaheth's reign ς and it was in
the island of Baoi Bearra, now Dursey, at the extreme point of the
promontory between Kenmare and BantryBays, that our author was
born. His grandfather, Dermod O'Suilivan, who is warmly eulogized
' hythe Fourlllasters, was accidentally killed hy au explosion of gun-
powder in his castle of Dunboy, in the year itta. Of the successors
in the chieftancy little is lrnown except their deaths. Auliffe, brother
of Dermod, and Donald,=his son, fell hythe sword. From them the
principality passed to Owen O’Suhevan who held it until the year
1593, when he was deposed hy the influence of the English, and Dun-
boy, the hey of his inlreritance, was giren up to his nephew, Dcnald.
⁴ During the thirty years of Owen's gorernment, he appears not to have
tehen an active part in the field with Firzmanriee, or any of the Ca-
tholic insurgents. Once, indeed, he was seiaed as a hostage hy the
Earl of Ormond, in 1580 3 but a few years later, his nemeis found
among those who were present during the parliament of 1585. His
successor, Douald, continued faithful to his patrous nearly ten years,
not shahen in his allegiance hy the decisive victories of the northern
chieftains, nor awed hy the triumphant march of Hugh O’Neil to
Munster in 1600. It was only when the Spaniards lauded at
Kinsale that he resolved to light for the liberty of his church.
He received foreign garrisons into his castles, and, hy a formal
document, still entant, transferred his allegiance to the king of
S ain.
pHitherto the conduct of the hearls of this family had not left much
to adorn the pages of the “Catholic History.” Philip's father, Dermod
however, like many of the younger sons of the great faurilies, did not
adopt the policy of his chiefs. In allrthe hlunster wars, from the year
1569, when St. Pius V. excornmunicated Elizaheth, down to the death

cf tho Earl of Desrncnd in 1535, Derrnod was in the field at the head of Α

 

