viii - rnnrnoa.

he set out from Glengariff on the last day of December, 1602, at the
head of 400 men, with a great crowd of women and children, nearly
l,000 in all. Over those rngged mormtains, which it is a toil for the
well-appointed conveyances of modern travelling to ascend even in sum-
mer, the little band, among whom were Don Philip’s father and mother,
marched in one day 26 milesto Aghers. Thence, under protection of
the great woods, keeping successively the mountains, which separate
Oork from Kerry and Limemck, they fought their way to the fastnesses
of Aharlow, near the town of Tipperary. Entrusting here to some
noble friend, the second son of Donald, a child two years of age, they
effected their retreat north through the barony of Kilmanagh, over the
Sliebh Feflim mountaius, on by the Ormondes, to the banks of the
Shannon, above Lough Derg. For the particulars of the battles fought
with the lord Barry at Lisoarroll, with the earl of Ormonde in rip-
perary, and afterwards with the Olanricards, we refer to the narrative
of our author. Having, bytho advice of Dermod, killed their horses, and
with the skins constructed currachS, they passed tho Shannon at Port-

land, and after several engagements, and making nearly the circuit of the

county of Roscommon, at last arrived at the castle of Briau O'Rcurke,

at Leitrim, on the terh of January, reduced by famine, fatigue, de-
sertion and the sword, to the number of thirty-five. “I am astonished,”
erclaims our author, “ how my father, who was then near seventy years
of age, and my mother, a delicate woman, could have so bravely borne
these fatigues, which broke down so many men in the flower of their
age, and the prime of their strength.” Before they arrived Rory O'Don-
nell had submitted, and O’Neil was meditating apeace. But there
was no pardon for the O'Sullivans. Don Philip was soon joined in
Spain by his whole surviving family, bisfather, mother, brother, aud two
sisters, together with the (YSullivan Bear, Donald himself.

To the fireside narratives of these exiles, and of many others driven

to Spain from every part of heland, it is highly probable we owe Don
Philip's taste for Irish history. The prominent figure of his family in
the Irish war, the society of persons who had been engaged in its ·
most stirring soenes, and the exhortatione cf his preceptor, Father
Synnott, must all have inspired him to publish the feats of ln's country
and kindred for the Catholic faith, and prove that the exiles were not
unworthy pensioners of the Oatholic king. lt is manifest, from his

 

